---
title: "Fast approximations of high-rank Hessians: applications to seismic inversion and uncertainty quantification"
collection: talks
type: "Talk"
permalink: /talks/2022-11-06-talk-2
venue: "5th Annual Meeting of the SIAM Texas-Louisiana Section"
date: 2022-11-06
location: "Houston, Texas, USA"
---

We propose a high-rank, computationally efficient method to approximate the normal operator (Hessian) arising in the linearized seismic reflection inversion problem in two spatial dimensions.  
Computing the exact Hessian is intractable for large-scale problems. In fact, performing the Hessian vector product requires solving PDE problems. 
Moreover, slow decay of the Hessian's eigenvalues means that low-rank approximation of the Hessian is costly.

Our first approach is based on the locality of the Hessian impulses. The approximation includes two steps. 
First, apply Hessian on several particular vectors to draw information of impulses, and modify the impulses on boundaries if necessary. 
Second, build the operator with impulses and preset weight functions by a product-convolution scheme. 
Our second approach is based on the theory that the Hessian is a pseudodifferential operator under certain conditions. 
The approximation also includes two steps. 
First, apply the Hessian on a specific probing vector. 
Second, determine the symbol of the pseudodifferential operator by solving a smaller size optimization problem. 

Both approaches approximate the Hessian operator within a small number of applications. 

The approximation can be expressed as an H-matrix, which facilitates fast matrix computations, such as inversion, to obtain a preconditioner. 
We used the inverse of the approximation as a preconditioner in the second-order Newton-Krylov methods applied to full-waveform inversion (FWI).
The preconditioner is highly desirable here because such preconditioners can reduce the required number of Krylov iterations within each Newton step, thereby reducing the computational cost.

We validate the method on the Marmousi model with constant density. Numerical experiments demonstrate that the preconditioner can reduce the computational costs substantially.
