---
title: "Fast Approximations of High-Rank Hessians: Applications to Seismic Inversion and Uncertainty Quantification"
collection: talks
type: "Talk"
permalink: /talks/2024-08-30-talk
venue: "International Meeting for Applied Geoscience & Energy (IMAGE)"
date: 2024-08-30
location: "Houston, Texas, U.S."
---

We propose a high-rank, computationally efficient method to approximate the normal operator (Hessian) arising in the linearized seismic reflection inverse problem. This approximation is then used to accelerate seismic inversion and uncertainty quantification. Computing the exact Hessian is intractable for large-scale problems. In fact, performing the Hessian-vector product requires solving costly PDE problems. Moreover, slow decay of the Hessian’s eigenvalues means that low-rank Hessian approximation methods, normally employed in these settings, become inefficient.

We adapt two existing methods to approximate the Hessian and develop a novel method combining them based on their duality relationship. The first method leverages the theoretical result that the linearized seismic Hessian is a pseudodifferential operator under certain conditions (Nammour, 2011, Huang et al., 2016, Beylkin, 1985). This method approximates the Hessian in two steps: first, applying the Hessian to a specific probing vector, and second, determining the symbol of the pseudodifferential operator by solving a smaller size optimization problem. The second method, the point spread function method, utilizes the locality of the seismic Hessian impulse responses (Zhang and Gao, 2023, Yang et al., 2022, Zhu et al., 2016). This method also involves two steps: first, applying the Hessian to several sums of Dirac delta functions to extract impulse responses information, and second, constructing the operator with these impulse responses and preset weight functions using a product-convolution scheme. Both methods approximate the Hessian with a small number of applications (possibly only one for the first). Additionally, we observe that the point spread function method constructs a pseudodifferential operator in a transposed manner. Based on this observation, we develop a novel approach that utilizes both methods to build a more accurate pseudodifferential operator.

Fast computation of pseudodifferential operators enable efficient matrix computations, such as inversion, to obtain a preconditioner. We used the inverse of the approximation as a preconditioner in the L-BFGS method for full-waveform inversion (FWI). This preconditioner is crucial for recovering the deep subsurface structure with less computational cost, as it prevents the solver from expending effort on the shallow part before addressing the deep part. Moreover, we use the approximation to accelerate uncertainty quantification within a Bayesian framework by constructing a proposal sampler that approximately draws samples from the posterior. This sampler generates accepted samples more efficiently in MCMC with the generalized preconditioned Crank-Nicolson algorithm (Pinski et al., 2015, Rudolf and Sprungk, 2018).

We validate our methods on the synthetic Marmousi model for constant density acoustics in two spatial dimensions. Numerical experiments demonstrate that the Hessian approximation can substantially reduce the computational costs in seismic inversion and uncertainty quantification.

[Slides Available](https://mathewgaohu.github.io/files/image24.pdf)
